Title: Principal Component Analysis
Date: 2017-01-13
Category: Data Science
Tags: Data Science
Author: Avinash TAMBY

Principal Component Analysis is a tricky topic, but it's incredibly useful to strengthen your statistical analysis.

Before diving into PCA, I first want to dicuss a bit about what it is and why it's important. PCA is a form of dimensionality reduction. When working on a data science problem, you usually have a set of features to analyze and you might use those features to make predictions. More often than not, however, many of your features are superfluous. They do not add a lot of predictive value, and keeping them in your model could lead to overfitting and describing noise rather than signal. With dimensionality reduction, you can reduce the number of features you use to build your model with the goal of improving the fit. There are two main types of dimensionality reduction: feature elimination and feature extraction. Feature elimination is a bit easier to understand. You simply drop features that you think don't contribute much to your model. PCA is a form of feature extraction. With PCA, you transform you feature variables into Principal Components and these PCs become your new feature set. The transformations are an attempt to describe as much of the data as possible so that you can drop less relevant PCs without losing too much information. Another important feature of PCA is that each PC is orthogonal to the other, and thus each PC is independent to every other PC; thus, multicollinearity ceases to be an issue.

Now to dive into how PCA works. Suppose you have an n x p feature matrix X with n rows of observations and p columns of features. To do PCA, first, you need to calculate the p x p covariance matrix C for the feature set where each element C(i,j) in C is the covariance between feature i and feature j. Thus, by definition, C(i,j) = C(j,i). Next, calculate the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of C. By definition, covariance matrices are real-valued, symmetric and positive definite (and thus diagonalizable), so there should always be p linearly independent eigenvectors of size p x 1 and p distinct eigenvalues. Now, your new feature set is the p x p matrix of eigenvectors, where each feature is now called a principal component, and the fraction of explained variance for each feature is the associated eigenvalue. Now you can choose how many PCs you want to keep. There are two common methods of choosing how many to keep. First, you can choose how much of the variance you want to explain, say 70%. So you choose the number of PCs that explain up to 70% of the variance. The other method is to "find the elbow" whereby you only keep the PCs that explain the most variance. So suppose you have 7 PCs and the 1st PC explains 40%, 2nd explains 30%, 3rd explains 10%, 4th explains 7%, 5th explains 6%, 6th exlains 5% and last explains 2%. Then you may want to only keep the first 2 PCs, because after that, the PCs don't explain a lot of the variance.

So that's a basic overview of how PCA works. It's an incredibly useful tool for dimensionality reduction and should lead to better fitting models. Really, it's only useful if the original features correlate, because PCA uses these correlations to determine the PCs. The drawback of PCA is the almost complete loss of interpretability. The PC don't have a real interpretable meaning because they're sort of a merged form of all of the original features.
